---
title: Day with intention
date: "2021-05-28"
description: Have you ever encountered yourself dealing with two or more contexts on your work at the same time? You were coding ...
tag: productivity, dev
---

# Day with intention

Have you ever encountered yourself dealing with two or more contexts on your
work at the same time? You were coding the solution from problem A. Your peer
on Slack requests your help to access some database to solve problem B. Then
you saw a discussion on a thread on problem C that also relates to problem D.
You follow some of the links posted on the thread, and an hour goes by you
realize that you are not supposed to be doing that. Or even worse, you are
watching a talk about some new tools for scaling on Kubernetes even though you
don't use Kubernetes. You may have helped your peer, or caught up with the
discussion, reached four different problems of your work "at the same time" but
still, that sensation of **achieving nothing** kicks in.

I remember - after the pandemic hit us  hard and the shift on our
routines made pretty much everyone crazy - I was feeling this sensation daily!
I was so overwhelmed by the amount of information coming in, that I had to find
a way to better manage my attention. I blocked distracting websites, started to
decline more meetings, and limited my work hours. These had their small
positive contributions. But everything changed when I reframed my approach for
the day, especially working hours.

For almost a year now, I've been using a method to better structure my day.
This had helped me a lot with dealing with this chaos, and I going to share it
with you.

## What

This method is heavily based on one of the main ideas on book "Deep Work" from
Cal Newport[^1]. It has three main principles:

The first and most important principle is **to avoid working in "reactive
mode"**. Where you address the tasks that are most demanding at the time. My
story that you read in the introduction (Yes! That was me!), is a great example
of a reactive mode workday. Instead, you want to **switch to intentional
mode**, where you plan your week and your days before actually starting
working.

The second principle is the ability **to look ahead and rethink**. When I used
to play football as a kid, my coach always said:

> Raise your head and look before you make a pass. Because at every moment of
the game you decide where the match goes. By choosing a teammate that is
surrounded by opponents or the one that has a chance to score the goal.

We can steer the direction of the day by pausing and seeing if what is left to do
still makes sense to do it. In other words, you plan your day but don't
strictly follow the plan. Remember, the importance is on having intention!

The final concept is to **stop multitasking**. There's a widespread fallacy
that claims people can deal with multiple tasks at a time. However, the
reality is the opposite[^2]. You can, and often need to, solve multiple
contexts on the same day, but not at the **same time**. By planning, you assign
time to tackle each of these matters separately.


## How

Now let's dive in on how we can apply these concepts to our day-to-day. For
this, we'll be using a custom time block planner[^3]. Be aware that I don't
follow exactly like that. This is aimed to be used during your work hours.
However, over time, I expanded to my projects. Therefore, I'm going to explain
the way that **I do it**. I recommend using it as an inspiration to create your
own.  Oftentimes, these methods are not 100% suited for our personal use.
There's always some tweaking that needs to be done!


### Tools

Go analog! Seriously! You don't need a computer to do this. You could be using
an app or other digital tools. But, that's just another opportunity to get
distracted! Also, the pencil and paper make the habit to stick, since every day
you have to sit and calmly write down what you have to do. It becomes your
daily ritual.

Any simple notebook and pen will do it. However, since it's something that
you'll do every day, I'd buy something of quality and not the cheapest. You
don't need to aim for the higher end, though. Going a little nerdy now: for
instance, I use a medium size (125x200mm) notebook, so it's easy to transport.
Dotted pages that help me on writing straight lines without the need for a
ruler. Somewhat thick page(80g/mÂ²), since I'm a heavy writer. And, a mechanical
pencil with 0.9mm lead. Again - thick - due to the force I put on writing.

import Image from 'next/image'

<Image
  src="/images/day-with-intention-0.png"
  alt="My notebook and mechanical pencil."
  width={1125}
  height={750}
  priority
  className="next-image"
/>


### Weeks

On the first day of the week, you do the weekly planning. Here, you mark the
current week number and you list the projects that you are currently active on.
Right below them, you list the main goals or tasks that you want to get done by
the end of the week. You don't have to be specific here, just list one or two
high-level goals/tasks for each project. Remember to be mindful about it. In my
opinion, three should be the maximum number of goals for each project. You want
to list the things that you actually could achieve in this period. If you are
familiar with the "Sprint Review" from Scrum, then this would be the Sprint
goal. However, here we are giving one (or more) for each project.

But "what is a project?", you may ask! A project is a context of your life that
act upon for a while. For example, if you are in school this can be a project.
Your job?, That's another project. If you are studying another language, this
can be a project too. Now, what if you have a different context inside those
projects? You can list them as subprojects. Taking the school example, one
subproject could be the classes and the other one the research or
extracurricular that you participate in. At work, if you act on hiring and a
specific product, these could become two subprojects on your weekly planning.
You decide the granularity of it. On top of that, I recommend having an extra
project to set tasks that don't fit into the previous ones. Usually, I put here
family stuff and other non-recurring obligations of the house.

<Image
  src="/images/day-with-intention-1.png"
  alt="How to list projects and goals."
  width={1125}
  height={750}
  priority
  className="next-image"
/>


### Days

Right after your week planning, on the next page, you start the daily plan by
marking the day of the week following by the date. On the left side of the
page, you list the hours that you want to have intention! Skipping one line
between each hour. Every line here represents 30 minutes. You could start
listing from the moment that you wake up until you go to sleep. But, I don't
recommend that. It's cognitively demanding to follow a time block plan, and
you would just burn out in the long run. You want to have periods on your day
to you do whatever you want (or need) without planning it. For me around twelve
hours is my max. Therefore, I plan from right after breakfast up to the last or
event after work. That's usually from 8 am to 8 pm.

<Image
  src="/images/day-with-intention-2.jpg"
  alt=""
  width={1125}
  height={750}
  priority
  className="next-image"
/>

Afterward, you draw the blocks reflecting your events and tasks that you need
to do on that day. I start with the meetings and events that I need to attend.
Then, based on my week planning, and other work tools to track tasks (like
JIRA), I fill the slots that I need focus to tackle those. For me, I try to set
90 minutes blocks (3 lines on the page) to these concentration tasks. For low
cognitive or quick ones, you can batch them onto one small block. For instance,
email and catch up on Slack plus other quick administrative work. On these
types of batch tasks, you'll see that you don't have enough room to write on a
30 min block. In that case, you just mark it and list the tasks on the right
upper corner side of the page.

Aside from the events, It's really important also to schedule breaks, buffer,
and commuting time. Breaks are crucial. They are often neglected, especially on
those days that you are "on fire", getting a lot done! But don't fool yourself,
we need them[^4]. Sometimes we forget that we are not robots! Based on the
Pomodoro technique, 30 minutes after 2 hours is a good rule of thumb. But that
will vary according to your need. Most of the days I set three big breaks: one
to two hours right around lunch, 30 minutes in the afternoon to drink a coffee,
and another 30 minutes right after work, before my last task to transition to
the night[^5]. If I start to work early like 7 am or 8 am, I take another break
around 10 am! Likewise, remember to schedule buffer and commuting time.  We
forget that between two events or tasks there will be transitions, either
physical or mental. So, between two meetings, set a 10 minute time window as a
break. When you have to go somewhere, include the commute time on the task
block!

<Image
  src="/images/day-with-intention-3.jpg"
  alt=""
  width={1125}
  height={750}
  priority
  className="next-image"
/>

As the day progresses you will notice that we are really bad at planning!
Certainly, you will need to reschedule some tasks or events. That's why we drew
the blocks on the left side of the page, leaving the middle and right sides
clear. When something goes off course, you just redraw (from the current time)
the new plan right next to the previous one. The right side is an extra column
for another re-plan. I've never needed a fourth column. Furthermore, some
unexpected tasks or ideas can pop into your mind during the day. What do to
with those? Well, that depends. Work-related, I use Slack's reminder feature.
For personal things, I put them on the lower part of the page to be addressed
later.

You repeat this process every day up to the end of your week. I just do this on
weekdays, leaving weekends free. The same goes for vacations or sick days. But
as I repeated throughout this essay: you have to adjust to your needs. There
will be workdays, though, where you will skip the planning. Those days, when
chaos takes place, are the ones where some urgent duty comes up, followed by
another one, and another one, and when you see it's already afternoon and you
didn't plan. Or when your motivation is below zero Kelvin, and you just WON'T
do it! And that's ok. Don't go too hard on yourself. On the next sunrise, you
get back to it. We are aiming for the long-term! As I'm checking my notebooks
here, throughout this year, I had two of those days: the first one was because
I had an appointment early in the morning and I left to do the planning when
I'd come back. However, a bug on production popped right before getting home.
That took me the whole day. Of course, I didn't plan! The other one, a recent
one, was a day that I just looked at the notebook and just thought: "Nop!, Not
today". I just forgot it and worked on reactive mode on that day. Remember: we
are not robots!


### An example

The most important part of having intention on your day is the execution. To
illustrate it better, I'm going to come up with a hypothetical situation. Let's
imagine that you are a developer on X company, you are learning French and, you
are a singer in a band (You are really cool!!!). It's week 26 of 2019 (let's
use pre-pandemic times :D). You are coding a new feature for a product, you
have a weekly chat with a native french called Adam, a concert scheduled for
next week, and your Mom's birthday on Wednesday.

On Monday, June 24th, at 8 am, you sit down to do your weekly planning. Ten
minutes after you come with the following:

<Image
  src="/images/day-with-intention-4.jpg"
  alt=""
  height={680}
  width={480}
  priority
  className="next-image"
/>

Right after that, you do the planning for your Monday. You have to attend two
meetings, a run session at night and singing practice. You come with the
following plan for your Monday:

<Image
  src="/images/day-with-intention-5.jpg"
  alt=""
  height={720}
  width={480}
  priority
  className="next-image"
/>

Right after planning, you do some email and Slack to get any updates. And then,
you enter the next big block: code the tests for the feature. You set aside the
notebook, and start working on that. In other words, if you have to code a test
case for your feature, you don't need Slack or your inbox opened, you are not
watching a youtube video at the same time, nor with a code-review tab opened.
You are coding the tests for your feature! Again to emphasize a little bit
more: YOU ARE CODING THE TESTS CASE FOR YOUR FEATURE. While you don't finish it
or your time block expires, you do nothing else.

It's tempting to think: "oh just a look at this message on Slack", or when your
test suit run that takes more than a minute: "let's take a quick look at
Twitter". No! As I mentioned earlier context switching does not help you on
accomplishing the task at hand. By being fully present on "coding the tests"
you improve the odds of finishing it with quality and on the time window that
you planned (or even earlier than that). Fail to resist that, and you may have
to reduce the time of your lunch, or maybe attend the meeting 1 divided with
the coding. Or even worse, the tasks linger to meeting 2, occupying the whole
working day.

This can happen due to bad estimates, but that is not a problem. When this
happens you have to adjust the plan. Let's say that you worked well in the
morning, but meeting 1 took an extra half an hour. Now it's time to rethink.
Maybe you can reduce the afternoon break. Or re-evaluate the necessity of
attending meeting 2. Since meeting 1 was long and meeting 2 is important, you
decided to keep that break and attend the next meeting. So you postponed a bit
your run session and the following tasks. You come with the updated daily plan:

<Image
  src="/images/day-with-intention-6.jpg"
  alt=""
  height={720}
  width={480}
  priority
  className="next-image"
/>

As the days progress, you want to mark the things that are being accomplished.
For instance, on Wednesday 26th, you check that you had a fun chat with Adam
the day before. On Thursday 27th morning, if you attend the birthday party at
your mom's, you check that. On next Monday, July 1st, you sit down again to a
new week planning. Looking at the previous week, you see that you didn't study
the french past verbs due to an unexpected company event on Thursday. Now it's
time to rethink: Will I have room this week to study it? Isn't better to
postpone to the next week, since you want to focus on the concert that is
coming? Notice that these are all questions. And only you will answer them. You
decide what is more important to do with your time.

## Outcomes

I've been using this for a year now. I don't consider a lot of time. But I've
already seen the benefits. Besides having intention and concentration on my
daily tasks, I noticed two other outcomes from this habit that is worth
mentioning to you.

The first one is that we start to **face the truth**. The idea is not to track, but
since you are writing the plan of your actions, you can easily evaluate how
much time a given task consumes. When you say that creating a report takes 30
minutes, but every time you have to increase that time window, you know that in
reality, it takes longer! Today, some set of activities from my job, I already
know how much time it will consume. I'm much more accurate on estimation, my
mean error is around 30 minutes.

On top of that, with the week planning, you also have a bird' eye view of what
you have done! If your company does employee evaluations recurrently, you can
start your self-evaluation[^6] by looking at your past pages to see what you were
up to. That works for personal projects too. I started to do personal quarterly
reviews on top of that. But that's another story.

The other outcome is the **boost on your "throughput"**. After the first
months, I suspected that I was delivering the tasks much faster than I used to.
I noticed that code reviews from my peers were becoming my bottleneck. In the
beginning, I just kept working. I started to use the idle time to fix a
technical debt of the project or to improve the readability on part of the code
or update documentation of the project. Months later, during a round of
feedback, my leader said to me that I was delivering a lot and with quality, He
said: "On every delivery, you always add something new, something better." I
know that is anecdotal, but I wasn't doing overtime nor working on weekends.
Looking at my notebook pages here I see that on average I work 7 hours per day,
including the 30 min afternoon breaks! My point here is that was another big
fact supporting my hypothesis from months before. This realization made me feel
so empowered!  It was like learning to unlock avatar state[^7].

Finishing the days with the sensation of progress is invaluable. It motivates
you! It keeps you moving forward in this world surrounded by noise.  I hope
that you start having intention on your days!

[^1]: I highly recommended read [it](https://www.calnewport.com/books/deep-work/), if you want the better understand the power of concentration.

[^2]: I'm not citing a specific article, but there is research supporting it. Check it [here](https://scholar.google.com/scholar?q=multitasking+effects) and [here](https://duckduckgo.com/?q=the+fallacy+of+multitasking)

[^3]: Not sponsored by it! But check [it](https://www.timeblockplanner.com/) out!

[^4]: Seriously, you need [downtime](https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/mental-downtime/)! Go watch an episode of Friends or Brooklyn Nine-Nine!

[^5]: This is my web surfing, social media, or just listening to rock concerts time!

[^6]: There's a really good post on writing self-evaluations by Julia Evans. She calls [Brag Documents](https://jvns.ca/blog/brag-documents/).

[^7]: For the ones that don't know this [masterpiece](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wwvRsqLzAJU).

